To measure the quality of life and clinical-functional results from patients diagnosed with osteoarthrosis of the distal radioulnar joint who underwent surgical treatment using the technique of total arthroplasty of the ulna, with a total or partial Ascension(®) prosthesis of the distal ulna. Ten patients were evaluated after 12 months of follow-up subsequent to total or partial arthroplasty of the distal ulna. All of them presented post-traumatic osteoarthrosis and/or chronic symptomatic instability of the distal radioulnar joint. The study was prospective. Seven patients had previously undergone wrist procedures (two cases with Darrach, three with Sauvé-Kapandji and two with ligament reconstruction of the fibrocartilage complex) and three presented fractures of the distal ulna that evolved with pain, instability and osteoarthrosis of the distal radioulnar joint. The following were assessed: quality of life (DASH scale); percentage degree of palm grip strength (kgf) and pronosupination range of motion in relation to the unaffected side; pain (VAS); return to work; subjective evaluation of radiography; and complications. The patients presented a mean range of motion of 174.5° (normal side: 180°). Quality of life was analyzed by applying the DASH questionnaire and the mean value found was 5.9. The mean pain score using the VAS was 2.3. The mean degree of palm grip strength (kgf) was 50.7, which represented 90.7% of the strength on the unaffected side. The complication rate was 10%: this patient presented slight dorsal instability of the ulna and persistent pain, and did not return to work. This patient is still being followed up in the outpatient clinic and occupational therapy sector, with little improvement. He does not wish to undergo a new procedure. The mean length of follow-up was 16.8 months, with a minimum of 10 and maximum of 36 months. This concept is subject to the test of time. Implantation of a prosthesis is a very interesting addition to the surgical arsenal for those who are specialists in hand surgery. Arthroplasty of the distal ulna is a safe and effective method with clinical-functional and quality-of-life improvements for patients and presents a low complication rate.
