To measure the quality of life, the time to work return, and clinical, functional, and radiographic parameters of patients treated with dorsal capsulodesis associated with scapholunate (SL) reconstruction, assisted by arthroscopy. From January 2015 to September 2016, 14 adult patients with SL dissociation underwent surgical treatment with the SL reconstruction procedure assisted by arthroscopy, using the new technique proposed in this study. All patients were assessed by the occupational therapy department at regular intervals after surgery and performed the same sequence of rehabilitation. The parameters analyzed were: range of motion (ROM), Disability of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH), visual analog scale (VAS), and radiographic analysis to visualize the pre- and postoperative SL gap and the pre- and postoperative dorsal intercalated segment instability (DISI) deformity the. The complications and the time to return to work activities were described. The follow-up time was 12 months (3-17). The ROM averaged 321° (96.9% of the normal side). VAS was 1.79/10 (1-6). DASH was 6.50/100 (1-30). The time to work return work was 4.42 months (2-17). As for complications, one patient developed SLAC, and underwent four-corner fusion one year after ligament reconstruction. Currently, he has experienced pain relief, with a functional range of motion of the wrist, and has not yet returned to professional activities.The preoperative SL gap was 4.29 mm (2-7); in the postoperative period, it was 1.79 mm (1-4). The DISI deformity was present in ten patients with SL angle > 70° (preoperative) and it was corrected after surgery, in all patients. SLAC stage I was identified in a patient. Arthroscopy was performed in all cases. The SL instability was classified as Geissler grade III in four cases and as grade IV in ten cases. The new approach (dorsal capsulodesis associated with SL reconstruction, assisted by arthroscopy) presented in this study is safe and effective in the treatment of SL dissociation, since it offers satisfactory clinical, radiographic and functional results, showing low rates of complications. For patients, it allows the return to their social and professional activities, and increases their life quality.
