The diagnostic acuity of colonoscopy requires a careful evaluation of the colonic mucosa, so an adequate bowel cleansing is a key element of the procedure. It is internationally recommended that an evaluation of the quality of the intestinal preparation should be included in the colonoscopy report. The Boston Bowel Preparation Scale (BBPS) is a bowel cleanliness rating scale that has gained some preponderance in this context. However, its application implies some degree of subjective appreciation, and it is important to conduct interobserver reproducibility studies in different contexts. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the reliability of the BBPS in the Portuguese gastroenterological community. A prospective study involving Portuguese gastroenterologists with clinical practice in several contexts, and using different methods of evaluation of the intestinal preparation. Participants were invited to answer a questionnaire encompassing 93 static images and 12 video segments of colonoscopy examinations, with different levels of intestinal preparation. For each item, the participant gastroenterologist assigned a score of 0-3, according to the BBPS criteria. A statistical analysis was performed with SPSS 20.0 software, using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). From 45 invited gastroenterologists, 36 replied (mean age 39 ± 9 years). Fifteen (41%) had more than 10 years of colonoscopy experience and 20 (56%) performed more than 40 examinations per month. Twenty-seven (77%) usually used the BBPS in their daily practice. Statistical analysis revealed a strong interobserver correlation (ICC = 0.783) in the application of the BBPS, even in those gastroenterologists who did not use the scale in their daily routine (ICC = 0.775) and those with less years of experience (ICC = 0.820). The correlation in the videos was slightly lower than that observed in the static images (ICC = 0.74 vs. ICC = 0.78). The application of the BBPS in the Portuguese gastroenterology community is reproducible and can represent a way to harmonize the colonoscopy reports, contributing to its correct interpretation and subsequent patient orientation.
