Portugal presents the highest incidence of stage 5 chronic kidney disease in Europe. It is speculated that a high consumption of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) may contribute to this high incidence. Our aim was to characterize the prescription of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to patients with diabetes mellitus in Portugal. We analyzed the national prescription database in triennium 2015 - 2017. In patients with diabetes mellitus, we evaluated the prescription of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs according to age, gender and region of the patient and specialty of the prescribing physician. We evaluated the prescription of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in all patients with diabetes mellitus, in patients with presumed renal impairment, and in those with concomitant prescription of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists. We analyzed 23 320 620 prescriptions, corresponding to 610 157 adults, including 104 306 patients with diabetes mellitus. The most prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were ibuprofen (20.1%), metamizole (14.7%), and diclofenac (11.4%). The prescription of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs was higher in females, in patients aged 51 - 70 years and in the Alentejo region. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were prescribed to 70.6% of patients with diabetes mellitus, from which 10.6% were prescribed ≥ 10 packages during the three years. Among patients with diabetes mellitus on angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors/angiotensin receptor antagonists and with presumed reduction in kidney function, 69.3% were prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and 11.5% were prescribed ≥ 10 packages during the three years. The level of prescribing of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to patients with diabetes mellitus is high. The concern of reducing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs prescription to patients already on angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors/angiotensin receptor antagonists and/or decreased renal function does not seem to exist. In Portugal, the level of prescribing of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to patients with diabetes mellitus should be reduced, particularly in the subgroups identified with higher prescription and with higher risk of progression to stage 5 chronic kidney disease.
