The Portuguese version of the Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire showed adequate psychometric properties in a community sample but the American cut-off seemed inadequate. This study aimed to validate this questionnaire in clinical populations of children with sleep disorders and with attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. The study sample included 148 Portuguese children aged 2 to 10 years old that where divided in 3 groups: 1. Clinical group with sleep disorders (behavioral insomnias, parasomnias or sleep-related breathing disorders); 2. Clinical group with attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder; 3. The sleep habits and sleep problems were evaluated using the Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire. Sleep-related disorders were confirmed by polysomnography. The questionnaire's internal consistency (Cronbach α) in the clinical sample (sleep disorders and attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder) was 0.75 and ranged from 0.55 to 0.85 for the subscales. Children with sleep disorders and attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder had a higher sleep disturbance index (full scale score) compared to the control group. The subscales presented significant differences between the subgroups with different sleep disorders showing discriminative validity. The receiver operating characteristic analysis of the sleep disturbance index comparing the sleep disorder and control sample determined a cut-off of 48 (sensibility 0.83; specificity 0.69). Children with sleep disorders and attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder evidenced higher Sleep Disturbance Index (full scale score) comparing to the control group. The subscales presented significative differences between the subgroups with different sleep disorders showing discriminative validity Conclusion: The Portuguese version of the Children's Sleep Habits Questionnaire showed adequate psychometric properties for children with sleep disorders and/or attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. The cut-off value 48 is better adjusted for the Portuguese population.
