To evaluate cortical excitability with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in children with new-onset epilepsy before and after antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Fifty-five drug-naïve patients (29 females, 26 males; 3-18y), with new-onset epilepsy were recruited from 1st May 2014 to 31st October 2017 at the Child Neurology Department, Queen Silvia's Children's Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. We performed TMS in 48 children (23 females, 25 males; mean [SD] age 10y [3y], range 4-15y) with epilepsy (27 generalized and 21 focal) before and after the introduction of AEDs. We used single- and paired-pulse TMS. We used single-pulse TMS to record resting motor thresholds (RMTs), stimulus-response curves, and cortical silent periods (CSPs). We used paired-pulse TMS to record intracortical inhibition and facilitation at short, long, and intermediate intervals. There were no differences in cortical excitability between children with generalized and focal epilepsy at baseline. After AED treatment, RMTs increased (p=0.001), especially in children receiving sodium valproate (p=0.005). CSPs decreased after sodium valproate was administered (p=0.050). As in previous studies, we noted a negative correlation between RMT and age in our study cohort. Paired-pulse TMS could not be performed in most children because high RMTs made suprathreshold stimulation impossible. Cortical excitability as measured with RMT decreased after the introduction of AEDs. This was seen in children with both generalized and focal epilepsy who were treated with sodium valproate, although it was most prominent in children with generalized epilepsy. We suggest that TMS might be used as a prognostic tool to predict AED efficacy. Resting motor threshold (RMT) correlated negatively with age in children with epilepsy. No differences in cortical excitability were noted between patients with generalized and focal epilepsy. Treatment with antiepileptic drugs decreased cortical excitability as measured with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Decreased cortical excitability with increased RMT was recorded, especially after sodium valproate treatment. Paired-pulse TMS was difficult to perform because of high RMTs in children.
