Fundão dam (Minas Gerais, Brazil) breached on 5 November 2015, releasing 50 million m³ of Fe ore tailings and dam materials into the upper Doce River system. The tailings travelled 670 km along the river system to the ocean. Starting on 17 November 2015, 6 days before the tailings reached the Doce River mouth, a water quality monitoring program with a daily sampling schedule was implemented by Samarco Mineração S.A. (Samarco) to assess the impacts on marine water and sediment quality. Between November 2015 and August 2017 water and sediment quality were monitored at 28 locations offshore from the Doce River mouth. The sampling areas were grouped by hydrological and metocean season (i.e., rainy and dry seasons and wave and wind climates), distance from the river mouth (<5 km, >5 km and within a Marine Protected Area), and water depth. The data were compared to the Brazilian water quality standards and prebreach conditions. Statistical tests were conducted to evaluate temporal and spatial trends and patterns. For the water quality parameters of relevance (total suspended solids, turbidity, total and dissolved Fe, Al, and Mn), pulses of concentration increases were observed right after the arrival of the plume in the coastal zone and during the subsequent rainy seasons. Exceedances of prebreach conditions were more frequent closer to the Doce River mouth. During the dry season, concentrations tended to decrease, reaching prebreach levels for a number of parameters, with small short-term pulses associated with metocean factors. For sediment quality parameters of relevance (particle size, Fe, Al, and Mn), Fe was the only one that clearly resulted from the dam breach, which was mediated by river influence and oceanographic factors affecting particle size distribution. Results indicated that the Fundão dam failure did affect water and sediment quality in the Atlantic Ocean, with greater impacts closer to the river mouth and immediately after the arrival of the tailings plume, with concentrations gradually returning to preevent levels over time. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2020;16:643-654. © 2020 SETAC.
