Brucellosis is a zoonotic disease that can involve different organs and tissues. Fever, fatigue, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, cytopenia, and arthritis are the usual modes of presentation. Gastrointestinal manifestations of human brucellosis are common but documented ileal involvement is extremely rare. A 68-year-old female presented with a history of 10 days of intense temporal migraine, photophobia, and phonophobia with partial response to paracetamol. The patient referred night sweats, anorexia, and colicky abdominal pain after her meals for the past 4 months followed by diarrhea. She denied nausea, vomiting, hypersensitivity of the scalp, blurry vision, melena, or rectal bleeding. She denied travelling or contact with animals. Physical examination revealed fever (38.3°C) and splenomegaly. Laboratory workup revealed Hb 7.8 g/dL, leukopenia (3.47 × 10<sup>9</sup>/L), C-reactive protein 5.94 mg/dL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 23 mm/h. Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatic steatosis and mild homogeneous splenomegaly. Chest radiography was normal. Lumbar puncture; transcranial, carotid, and temporal arteries Doppler, and head computed tomography (CT) did not show any significant changes. Abdominal CT showed diffuse thickening of the ileum and some mildly swollen locoregional lymph nodes. Fecal calprotectin was not elevated. Blood cultures and serologies were positive for <i>Brucella</i> (positive Rose-Bengal test, ELISA IgM-positive, IgG-negative anti-brucella antibody serology and positive Huddleson reaction - titer 1:320). The patient was started on rifampicin 600 mg/day and doxycycline 100 mg q. 12 h for 10 weeks with good clinical and analytical response. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy were normal, although the last was done already under antibiotic treatment. Although gastrointestinal manifestations of brucellosis are quite common, ileitis is thought to be extremely rare. In countries where brucellosis is endemic, doctors must consider this diagnosis when faced with patients with systemic symptoms and diarrhea or abdominal pain. Early recognition of brucellosis and institution of appropriate therapy usually leads to a good recovery without complications.
