Pre-clinical assessments of bone substitute materials are frequent in the literature, but research papers about the clinical situation of bone graft use and consumer market acceptance are rare. The aim of this study was to evaluate the dental use of bone grafts according to the perception of dentists in the city of Sobral, Brazil. We interviewed 183 professionals and analyzed their professional data, knowledge of the subject, specific use, and opinions on cost-effectiveness and biosafety. Most of the respondents had 10 years' or less experience in the profession, and lacked specialization though they had been familiar with the subject since they graduated. The most frequently mentioned compositions were ceramics, followed by composites. Only a quarter of the respondents had performed bone grafts, generally with up to 50 cases, with the most frequent applications being using simultaneously with a dental implant, fresh dental sockets and maxillary sinus lifting. Autogenous and xenogeneic grafts were more frequent than alloplastic and allogeneic; ceramics were the most frequently used composition, and the association of bone graft with membrane was more frequent than bone graft alone or associated with autologous fibrin. Professional and patient satisfaction was high, cost was considered moderate, and differences were found regarding patient participation in the choice and country of origin of the product. Bone grafts were used more often in the private than public service. Dentists stated that they follow the instructions. Inflammatory or infectious complications were found to be related to the frequency of the procedure performed and safety regarding the origin. Opinions were favorable regarding the use of grafts derived from animals and unfavorable to grafts derived from cadavers. Very few respondents were registered in human bone tissue banks. The good level of acceptance for dental use of bone grafts in a Brazilian inland city provides a promising scenario for the development of the sector.
