To understand the attitudes, barriers, and facilitators to physical activity participation for young people and adults with childhood-onset physical disability. Seven electronic databases (Embase, MEDLINE, PsychINFO, AMED, CINAHL, SPORTDiscus, and ERIC) were searched to November 2019. English language studies were included if they investigated attitudes, barriers, or facilitators to physical activity for young people (≥15y) or adults with childhood-onset physical disabilities. Two reviewers applied eligibility criteria and assessed methodological quality. Data were synthesized in three stages: (1) thematic analysis into descriptive themes, (2) thematic synthesis via conceptual framework, and (3) an interpretive synthesis of the thematic results. Nineteen studies were included. Methodological quality varied, with only four qualitative studies and one quantitative study meeting all quality items. An overarching theme of 'finding the right balance' emerged. Six subthemes relating to capability, opportunity, and motivation contributed to physical activity participation being seen as 'the right fit' or 'all too hard'. The interpretive synthesis found social connections, social environment support, and an appropriate physical environment were essential to 'finding the right balance' to be physically active. Physical activity participation for young people and adults with childhood-onset physical disabilities is primarily influenced by the social and physical environment. What this paper adds Physical activity participation for young people and adults with childhood-onset physical disabilities is primarily influenced by environmental factors. 'Finding the right balance' between enabling and inhibitory factors was important to physical activity participation being perceived as 'the right fit'. The opportunity for social connection is an important motivator for physical activity participation for young people and adults. The physical environment continues to act as a barrier to physical activity participation for those with physical disabilities.
