Build and validate the content of conceptual and operational definitions of the defining characteristics of the nursing diagnosis of NANDA-I 'Ineffective health self-management' in people living with HIV/AIDS. Methodological study, with a quantitative approach. The validation was performed by 26 specialist nurses selected through the Lattes do Brazil platform. The process followed two steps: (a) proposal of new defining characteristics to the Nursing Diagnosis 'Ineffective Health Self-Management' and elaboration of conceptual and operational definitions; (b) content validation of the new defining characteristics of the Nursing Diagnosis 'Ineffective Health Self-Management' and the conceptual and operational definitions. Data were collected between October 2020 and May 2021. The researchers included six defining characteristics as components of the diagnosis, adding to the 10 already existing in the NANDA-I version (2021-2023). Then, the experts judged these components and 13 defining characteristics were validated using the binominal test with adequacy ratio above 85% and p value <0.05. After this stage, the conceptual and operational definitions of these defining characteristics were constructed, validating them by the content validation index ≥0.80 by the expert nurses. Three new defining characteristics for Ineffective health self-management were proposed and validated by specialists. Conceptual and operational definitions of the new and current defining characteristics were elaborated and validated for people living with HIV/AIDS. The knowledge and study of the conceptual and operational definitions of nursing diagnoses can contribute to good nursing practices, assisting in the care and evaluation of nurses in the provision of care to people living with HIV/AIDS, and can avoid misunderstandings and inappropriate interpretations and can guarantee assertive clinical judgment. Nursing diagnosis, validation studies, nursing processes, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
